module system: Improve error messages around faulty imports (#197547)
NixOS/nixpkgs: doc/module-system/module-system.chapter.md

# Module System {#module-system}

## Introduction {#module-system-introduction}

The module system is a language for handling configuration, implemented as a Nix library.

Compared to plain Nix, it adds documentation, type checking and composition or extensibility.

::: {.note}
This chapter is new and not complete yet. For a gentle introduction to the module system, in the context of NixOS, see [Writing NixOS Modules](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/unstable/index.html#sec-writing-modules) in the NixOS manual.
:::

## `lib.evalModules` {#module-system-lib-evalModules}

> Evaluate a set of modules. This function is typically only used once per application (e.g. once in NixOS, once in home-manager, ...).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Evaluate a set of modules. This function is typically only used once per application (e.g. once in NixOS, once in Home Manager, ...).
```

Apparently this is the proper name

### Parameters {#module-system-lib-evalModules-parameters}

#### `modules` {#module-system-lib-evalModules-param-modules}

A list of modules. These are merged together to form the final configuration.
<!-- TODO link to section about merging, TBD -->

#### `specialArgs` {#module-system-lib-evalModules-param-specialArgs}

An attribute set of module arguments that can be used in `imports`.

> This is in contrast to `config._module.args`, which is only available after all `imports` have been resolved.

Author: TBD, issue
 - https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/230361

#### `class` {#module-system-lib-evalModules-param-class}

> If the `class` attribute is set and non-`null`, the module system will reject `imports` with a different `_class` declaration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `class` attribute is set and not `null`, the module system will reject `imports` with a different `_class` declaration.
```

Link to _class? It's a different one it seems, so needs a reference.

The `class` value should be a string in lower [camel case](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camel_case).

If applicable, the `class` should match the "prefix" of the attributes used in (experimental) [flakes](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/new-cli/nix3-flake.html#description). Some examples are:

 - `nixos` as in `flake.nixosModules`
 - `nixosTest`: modules that constitute a [NixOS VM test](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-nixos-tests)
<!-- We've only just started with `class`. You're invited to add a few more. -->

#### `prefix` {#module-system-lib-evalModules-param-prefix}

> A list of strings representing the location at or below which all options are evaluated. This is used by `types.submodule` to improve error reporting and find the implicit `name` module argument.

Author: Not linkable because it's rendered as a stupid variable list without anchors.
I'd change it to be all headers, but this PR has enough scope creep.

The option definitions that are typed with this type will extend the current set of modules, like [`extendModules`](#module-system-lib-evalModules-return-value-extendModules).

However, the value returned from the type is just the [`config`](#module-system-lib-evalModules-return-value-config), like any submodule.

You can think of this `evalModules` invocation as the prototype, and usages of this type as the instances.

This type is also available to the [`modules`](#module-system-lib-evalModules-param-modules) as the module argument `moduleType`.
<!-- TODO: document the module arguments. Using moduleType is like saying: suppose this configuration was extended. -->

#### `extendModules` {#module-system-lib-evalModules-return-value-extendModules}

A function similar to `evalModules` but building on top of the already passed [`modules`](#module-system-lib-evalModules-param-modules). Its arguments, `modules` and `specialArgs` are added to the existing values.

You can think of the current, actual `evalModules` invocation as the prototype, and the return value of `extendModules` as the instance.

> 

Author: It makes sense in the context of prototype inheritance, so I've added "If you're familiar with prototype inheritance,".

# Module System {#module-system}

## Introduction {#module-system-introduction}

The module system is a language for handling configuration, implemented as a Nix library.

Compared to plain Nix, it adds documentation, type checking and composition or extensibility.

NOTE: This chapter is new and not complete yet. For a gentle introduction to the module system, in the context of NixOS, see [Writing NixOS Modules](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/unstable/index.html#sec-writing-modules) in the NixOS manual.

## `lib.evalModules` {#module-system-lib-evalModules}

Evaluate a set of modules.  The result is a set with the attributes:

### Parameters {#module-system-lib-evalModules-parameters}

> #### `modules` {#module-system-lib-evalModules-param-modules}

Author: Having anchors is more important than the exact look, but in my opinion an `h4` header is already rendered like a definition list; same size font, but not tabular I guess.

> A list of modules. These are merged together using various methods to form the final configuration.

Reviewer: Would be great if we could refer to those methods more concretely somehow. There surely is section on merging?

Author: I've removed it, as it contained no information. It should be documented, but that's a rabbit hole for another PR.

#### `specialArgs` {#module-system-lib-evalModules-param-specialArgs}

An attribute set of module arguments that can be used in `imports`.

> This is in contrast to `config._module.args`, which is only available within the module fixpoint, which does not exist before all imports are resolved.

Reviewer: If you say fixpoint you lose the last couple of people who were still following. No suggestion how to improve here, I suppose we just need a better introduction to the module system. @NixOS/documentation-team that would be a great, in fact heroic, first task for a NixOS manual maintainer.

Author: Good point! Rephrased it in terms of what goes before what; no "fixpoint" needed.

#### `specialArgs.class` {#module-system-lib-evalModules-param-specialArgs-class}

If the `class` attribute is set in `specialArgs`, the module system will rejected modules with a different `class`.

> This improves the error message that users will encounter when they import an incompatible module that was designed for a different class of configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Sounds like release notes material.

> The `class` value should be in camelcase, and, if applicable, it should match the prefix of the attributes used in (experimental) flakes. Some examples are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `class` value should be in camelcase.

If applicable, it should match the prefix of the attributes used in flakes (experimental). Examples:
```

I'm not sure what you mean by prefix though. Is it the attrset name containing the actual module?

Please link to a sensible definition of camel case. Also link to flakes, otherwise this will be another instance where people will be left wondering what those damn flakes are even supposed to be.

Author: I've put scare quotes around prefix to hint that it's a local, informal definition. An example follows and explains it.

 - `nixos`: NixOS modules
 - `nixosTest`: modules that constitute a [NixOS VM test](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-nixos-tests)

#### `prefix` {#module-system-lib-evalModules-param-prefix}

A list of strings representing the location at or below which all options are evaluated. This is used by `types.submodule` to improve error reporting and find the implicit `name` module argument.

### Return value {#module-system-lib-evalModules-return-value}

#### `options` {#module-system-lib-evalModules-return-value-options}

> The nested set of all option declarations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The nested attribute set of all option declarations.
```

#### `config` {#module-system-lib-evalModules-return-value-config}

The nested set of all option values.

#### `type` {#module-system-lib-evalModules-return-value-type}

> A module system type representing the module set as a submodule, to be extended by configuration from the containing module set.

Reviewer: I... don't really understand what that's supposed to mean. Can you provide an example or link to definitions of terms? There seem to be at least three different concepts at play:
1. Types in the module system
2. Submodules
3. Extending one of these

Author: I've split it into multiple sentences and elaborated it more. Would much appreciate another look.

> This is also available as the module argument `moduleType`.

Reviewer: Is it available *to* a module as an argument? Can you link to docs where that is shown?

Author: Yes, to a module arguments, but those are currently undocumented, and doing that is too many rabbit holes deep for now.

#### `extendModules` {#module-system-lib-evalModules-return-value-extendModules}

> A function similar to `evalModules` but building on top of the module set. Its arguments, `modules` and `specialArgs` are added to the existing values.

Reviewer: Which module set? The returned one?

```suggestion
A function similar to `evalModules` but building on top of this module attribute set. Its arguments, `modules` and `specialArgs` are added to the existing values.
```

Author: It's funny that we don't have a term for an _actual set_ of modules. I think I'll rely on the plural and a link to the parameter.

> Using `extendModules` a few times has no performance impact as long as you only reference the final `options` and `config`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `extendModules` multiple times has no impact on evaluation performance as long as you only reference the final `options` and `config`.
```

I know that people not firm with the Nix language will be left puzzled if you mean NixOS runtime performance.

> If you do reference multiple `config` (or `options`) from before and after `extendModules`, performance is the same as with multiple `evalModules` invocations, because the new modules' ability to override existing configuration fundamentally requires a new fixpoint to be constructed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you do reference multiple `config` (or `options`) from before and after `extendModules`, evaluation performance is the same as with multiple `evalModules` invocations, because the new modules' ability to override existing configuration requires a constructing a new fixpoint.
```

This may create more confusion than it alleviates, but let's lebe it here in hope for a good introduction.

Author: I've put it in a `{.note}` with an **Evaluation Performance** header in it, so that it's clear that this is not required reading.

> This is also available as a module argument.

Reviewer: As above, which module argument, where?

Author: Still out of scope.

#### `_module` {#module-system-lib-evalModules-return-value-_module}

> A portion of the configuration tree which is elided from `config`. It contains some values that are mostly internal to the module system implementation.

Reviewer: Should it be documented then? One could argue this shouldn't be exposed to begin with.

Author: This is tech debt until the markdown migration is complete and we can show the `_module` docs again.
Internal-ness has been debated.

Reviewer 2: I don't think `_module` should be internal. As I can see, the main reason it should be prefixed with a `_` is to avoid clashing with users option names. In https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/97023 I even tried enabled rendering of these options in the manual. That entire PR was reverted, but that as a separate change would still be good.
